Yes, correct just already put the
this piece of code just printing
some values and etc so you can use
a code which was already uploaded.
So yeah, just simple printing out
that I'm the current user. And.
Yeah, just to make sure that everyone.
Can write a simple C program and build it.
OK.
So.
Just make sure that I mean
everyone has the focus,
so I need all of you.
Send me some feedback.
Emojis feedbacks or whatever,
just to make sure that you
have the focus to this line.
Thank you Mia.
Awesome, thank you.
Thank you Hallie. Thank you nerd.
Thank you, Vivian.
Marcus zeynab so Nicholas asks,
is it right to use an IDE for
the remaining labs? All yes.
I mean you can use any coding environments,
but The thing is that in this course we want
to motivate you to use the bare minimum.
So just a text editor is enough for
a C programmer to write a program,
and also by looking at the warning
or error from the compiler,
you have to figure out which
line of your code has a problem.
So, uh, we are not promoting using any IDE,
but you're allowed to use it so it doesn't
matter if you wanted to use an IDE,
but it's it's a good practice that
you try hard to use a bare text
editor and write your C programs
without the sophisticated options
that an IDE gives you.
Yeah.
Great yeah. But again,
I mean you're allowed to use any IDE to
write your code and then compile it in
the Linux environment. So let's start.
Actually today you have a lot of
slide and I hope I can make it up.
Up until the end.
So again, today we have another
movie to recommend a I don't know.
You have seen this movie so Ex
Machina actually see I mean Greek.
Or Latin word the movie.
By Alex Garland.
This is the knife scene I had really
suggest you to watch this movie.
Uh, which is kind of AI related movie
and philosophical challenge of the
AI and the future of the AI and etc.
But at some point it is related to some
topic that we are going to cover today.
So.
So far we said that how we use the top.
I mean the concept of boot strap to load a
different type of programs into the memory.
We start with the bootstrapping or booting
up the kernel by the help of the bios.
Which is provided by the
manufacturer of the computer system
and also the master boot record.
So these two helps to load the
kernel as a program into the memory
and becomes a process,
and then after that the kernel keeps
full control of the computer system.
And then we said that how a device,
uh, interact with the system through
the IRQ or intra request with this
specific number IRQ number which is
assigned to each device with a keyboard,
has the IRQ.
One mouse has the IRQ 9 at the clock
in the system has the IRQ zero and all
the different devices has its own irqs,
and we said that IRQ.
Is electrical shock or electrical
signal sent by the device to the
processor and by receiving the IRQ
the processor maps the RQ number
to a memory address and that memory
address is the handler for that IRQ
based on the look up table and they
handle is a part of the kernel.
So we explain how a handler.
Is basically called by the processor
to handle a device, uh, I mean signal.
And now the next important part
is how to bootstrap a program.
Our application level programs must
be in the memory and become a process
to be runnable by the processor.
You said that a shell which is
another application level program
written and delivered by the company,
that right the operating system.
The Colonel helps us to bootstrap
the program into the memory and now
we want to explain. This cycle.
So we had a question from our own.
He says RRQ same each time.
System boots.
Yes, actually these are fixed yet.
So one thing is that if you install
you may experience this before.
For instance, if you install a new device,
for instance at digital PEN or a new.
I mean, for instance,
a wireless headset.
Usually this setup of that program
asks you to reboot the system because
by doing the reboot all the numbers
are going to be fixed to each device.
As in the previous slide,
I mean last lecture I showed that some
of them are fixed all around the world.
For instance,
the timer always has the IQ zero.
You are not able to change it.
Uh,
this is also a question in
the lecture assignment,
so you can search about that,
and I'm not going to give you the
answer to the lecture Simon, but yeah.
So Michael asks.
Yes, for the keyboard is also
always the same the number one.
Uh, I have two keyboards,
one on my laptop and one I'm kickstand old.
Oh, that's a good question, Michelle.
One thing is that the standard keyboard,
uh, is the I mean.
It used to be the PS2 keyboard.
However, for instance, if you use one
of the key standard keyboard becomes the
standard input device and established
standard input device has the IQ one.
Other keyboards goes to the available argues.
Uh, I showed you before that.
I mean, in that list of the argues,
some of them are not reserved,
so the the company that makes for
instance a wireless keyboard,
uses one of the available are cues
for that wireless keyboard etc.
Yeah, but the standard one.
I mean, one of the keyboard
becomes the standard input device
which actually use the R Q1.
So yeah, so today we are going
to explain how to put this driver
program and we already said that
this process is very similar to
the way that the God actually.
Make us a living being out of
dust or out of a dead body.
So here is the code that I
used here from Piper.
This is the actual code
in the Bible that I mean.
I I put this code because the
process is exactly the same as
long as program is in the USB in a
CD ROM or any hard described it.
Just it dust of ground.
It's a dead body, however,
with the help of the shell and
the kernel of operating system,
you are kind of breathing to
this dead body and make it as a
living species inside the memory.
So Colonel and the shell acts
like a lower God, yeah,
so let's see how this happens.
So. Uhm?
Initially you write,
your program is a programming
language such as C, like this,
and then you give it to the
compiler that language,
for instance using a text editor.
You write your program,
you give it to a compiler of the
DAT program language in the sea.
We have this CC as a compiler
of the C language,
and then after producing the assembly lines,
you give it to the assembler of that machine.
The compiler of the C has the assembler.
In itself,
so it has both steps.
So by just one command you convert
your C program into the opcode of a,
I mean binary sequence to be ready
to be executed by the processor.
Next week's lab,
you are going to practice each
step of the C compiler.
How to produce the assembly lines,
how to produce the opposite.
You have to be a little bit patient up
until next week that you can see how to.
I mean,
specifically create the assembly
lines and specifically create
the opcodes and play with them.
But for now, by just running the C compiler,
you can go from the C program up until the.
Up code.
So now your opcodes are ready to be run,
but it is stored in a USB or any.
For instance hard disk drive.
So the main task is how to
bootstrap your program.
He said that in kernel there is a main many.
I mean one of the managers,
which one which is the main manager in
the kernel is called process manager
and the main task of process manager is that.
Again,
lucky God.
I mean make it program as a process,
assuming by just very I
mean a simple assumption.
We can assume that this part of the
kernel is at this address of the memory.
So the task is that we have
to find a way to adjust these
registered the instruction pointer
register of the CPU or processor
to become this value
FF1C0. When it becomes this value,
the next instruction that
the process of fetch is this.
So basically it's kind of jumping the
processor or calling this part of the kernel.
And then the kernel knows
where is the program.
And, uh, do I mean loading the
program inside the memory?
So these are the three main steps.
First of all,
we have to show the kernel where is
the our program with the I mean the
file of our program in what path?
And then we have to set the
processor to point to the to the
location of process manager.
And then the process manager loads your
program inside the memory and after
loading your program inside the memory.
That cannot should change the IP of
the processor and give the control
to the first up code of your program
and then your program have the
processor and can start the opcode
become executed in the processor.
So all these steps are going to
be done by the help of the shell.
So what is a shell shell?
It's just a program.
And also it's an application level program,
so it's not a part of a kernel.
And act as a dispatcher.
So let's see what is a shell.
So basically when you go to the market
and buy a operating and operating system.
Any operating system comes with a
another application called SHELL,
but this is not part of the kernel,
so it's not an important part
of the operating system,
but it's a necessary thing to help
the other programs to bootstrap
inside the memory.
So when did Colonel bootstraps inside
the memory of the last step of the
kernel is loading this application program,
which is attached to the which is
delivered by the operating system.
When you buy the operating system.
And then the kernel sets the IP
process IP of the processor to
the first address of the shell.
So basically the kernel loads the shell
and then gives the control to the shell.
Shell is just a very simple program.
The main task of the shell is
just doing the busy waiting.
We already said what is busy waiting.
Busy waiting means that just doing one
statement to experiment and then come
back in the first statement and then again.
It's kind of a just do a busy loop
or spinning without doing anything,
but in between you can do some checking.
So Shell is just a busy waiting program.
However,
in each cycle of the busy waiting
is check whether there is a program
to people distract or not.
So here is the shell.
So when you turn on your computer
after buyers massive boot record
and loading the car inside the
memory you see this.
Kind of,
I mean a command prompt basically
shows that who is the user and
in what system you log in.
But it waits here. So usually it blinks.
This cursor blinks,
meaning that this is the shell.
Basically it does the busy waiting
checking whether you put some command or no,
you put some program or not,
and if there's nothing it go
bags to the first statement.
So basically it's just wasting the CPU time.
Is in a cycle. However.
We know that there are some
other programs inside a.
For instance hard disk drive
and we want to run this program
and bootstrap into the memory.
How this happens?
So basically you have to say tell
the shell where is your program.
And then hit enter.
So basically when you type the
name of your file that contains
the output of your program inside
this shell and you hit the enter.
Basically a defer stop code
of the shared checks, uh,
whether there is something in
the command prompt, or no.
If there's nothing, you go back to first.
But here it says something and if
you hit the enter when you hit the
enter in the next cycle of the shell,
when it checks whether there is
a program in the command prompt,
it sees your program.
Now it goes to other parts of the system.
Well where it goes. So basically when.
A shell receive it, enter a,
it checks the command prompt and
sees a file which contains opcodes.
When it sees such a thing,
it knows where is the process
manager of the kernel.
It changes the IP register of
the processor with the address
of the process manager,
and then in the next cycle
of the processor the control
goes to the process manager.
So now the shell doesn't have any control.
Everything is in the hand
of the process manager.
But when shall change?
Is the IP of the processor.
In order to make it jump
to the processor location,
it also gives the location of your program.
For instance, it says that the.
The hello sorry,
the Hello program is in the current folder.
So it gives the address of your file
while changing the IP address of
the IP register of the processor.
So now the process manager knows where
is the file in order to load the file.
So the process manager loads your file,
but it does more things.
For instance, it adds some lines
of code before your opcodes.
Also it adds some lines of
code after your opcodes.
Also it attaches an ID to that program
and now your program because it
becomes a process with an ID because
it's the first program it becomes
process number one but including some.
Additional opcodes that are added by
the process manager at the beginning of
your opcodes and at the end of your outputs.
What is next? The next?
Is that giving the control of processor
to your process so the kernel knows
knows where your process is loaded,
so it gives the address of
this address of the memory.
A which would be any available space in the
memory into the IP register of the processor?
By assigning the IP register to
the fears of code of your process,
the next execution cycle of the process
is gonna be your awkward and etc.
So your program starts to be executed
by the processor sequentially.
It goes, I mean, step by step up until
the last upgrade of your process.
In the meantime,
sometimes you may call.
The Colonel.
To do something for you later,
we'll see how we can do that,
for instance in in the one of your
opcode you call to print out,
for instance, print.
F for instance hello world.
So who wants to put these characters
into the standard output?
You just call a function.
The actual work gonna be done by the
kernel by the device manager of the
kernel that takes control of the monitor,
for instance.
So basically you have to request
from the kernel to do and into output
hello characters in the output
when the kernel does that for you,
it returns the control to your
process and then you continue with
other opcodes of your program so.
While your process is running in the system,
you can request multiple.
I mean call to the kernel and then the
kernel does those tasks for you and
return the control to your process.
Later,
we'll see what what type of requests
you can ask from the kernel.
One of the immediate one is just
printing characters to the monitor.
Other one would be,
I mean asking a user input from the keyboard.
And then finally your process is done.
All these steps of your opcodes
is done successfully,
and now this is the last moment
that your process is done.
The question is that how or who
brings back the control to the shell?
Because after running your program there
are other programs that you want to run.
So how you want to bring back the
control to the shell and then the shell
checks whether it is a new program or not,
and then if there is a new one
to distract the new program.
But the main question is that how we
can return back to control to the shell.
In another word, how can we change the
IP address IP register of the processor?
Back to the first OP code of the Shell,
because the shell does the busy waiting,
the only thing we need is that
just bring back the processor
to this address that fills out,
put up the shell. So. Let's, uh,
I already put it as a question so.
That's your, see your answers.
So this is the. Diagram for your answers,
so I'm going to post the question URL.
So I put it in the chat box.
So please go to this URL and then,
uh, let's see. Your answers.
Yep. Finish the wall.
Who brings back who I mean
we have journal we have.
Shall we have your process?
One of these should bring back
the control to the shell.
In another world,
one of these should change the
IP register of the processor.
Who does that?
I mean kernel,
shell or process?
Guys we have no any student in
the class so. I'm waiting for you.
So far we have 50 around 50 world.
So in order to answer this question,
we have to ask that who has the
processor right now. Process.
Your process has the control of the process,
so the only person or the only entity
that can change the IP and has the last
chance to change their IP is your process.
The shell cannot do it itself
because it doesn't have the process.
The kernel cannot do that because
it doesn't have the process.
This is the moment that the process
has the chance to change the IP
register of the processor and
put the address of the shell.
So let's see.
Your answers.
Oh great, most of you actually.
Uh.
Put a. Correct answer or wrong answer.
So basically this is not right.
I think the 32% our process
actually is correct. So who out?
Sorry about that, this one is correct.
The 32 I mean the out process is correct.
So the next question is that
because kernel cannot do that,
so kernel doesn't have the processor,
so can I cannot change the IP register.
Patty next question is that.
Now that our process wants to change
the IP register of the processor,
how our process does that?
The main question is that.
The process.
Doesn't know where the shell
is located in the memory.
So if the process wants to change
the IP register from where it
knows the address of the shell.
So either as a programmer,
somebody told us that the shell is
at this address always in memory.
So then when we write a program in
C language, we at the end of our
program we have to add the C line
and says that change the address of
the IP register to this specific
address which is for the shell.
He never do such a thing.
I mean in our program.
So then the second one is not
right but the first one is correct.
So let's see your answers correct.
But the main thing is that how we do this?
So. If you look at closely,
look closely to the process.
Not only it has your opcode, but also,
as I said, it has some parts,
uh, added to your program.
At the first, we call it prologue,
and also at the end of your program,
which is which we call it a pillow.
When the kernel has the control
in or after loading your process,
it attaches some code lines or up
codes to the beginning of your
program or process and also at
the end of your process.
One of those opcodes at the end
of your program is this one.
IP equal to the address of the shell.
Because kernel is the one that who
who knows is the one that knows
where is the shell in the memory,
so it knows the address of the shell.
Your process doesn't know that.
But the kernel,
because the kernel is the first
program inside the memory and right
after the kernel of the shell.
Actually Buddhist apps in the memory.
So the kernel loads the shell and
knows where is the address of the shell.
So when the kernel loads any
other process inside the memory,
it attached this last command to the process.
So after your last opcode.
It goes to the epilogue part,
which is attached by the kernel,
and then the control changes
to his shell by this command.
So we can say that it is done by the process.
But because of some additional
opcodes added by the kernel.
So now there's another question
we can see that when the process
has the control of the processor.
It can does anything it can.
Basically a change the IP
register of the processor and
go to any part of the memory.
For instance, it can kill the kernel.
It goes to the memory space of
the kernel and ruins everything.
So let's back to our code.
Here you can write some piece of code
in this part that basically the opcode
is that put zero at this address.
Put zero at the next address of.
Basically it just put all the memory space,
fill all the memory with the zeros.
So you can write such a program
in C language. It's very simple,
so you basically know how to.
I mean, fetch a memory address.
You can start from the zero address of
the memory increment that address by
one and put the value of that address.
That memory location zero. It's very
simple in a four loop you can do that.
So if you can, if you do that,
you basically can kill the kernel.
You can kill the shell and etc.
So it's very basic. I mean similar to this.
The idea behind this movie.
Uh. The Colonel.
Creates the process inside the memory
and then the process kills the kernel.
So it basically a creature kills the creator.
So. Read about this.
I mean I'm not going to explain
the the idea behind the.
A title of the movie and basically Deus
Ex machina means that in Asian Greek A.
In some play when they wanted to say
that the God intervenes in the world
matters and wants to solve the problem,
they use a crane or in the Greek it's
called Mackenna mocking actually.
So then there's.
Is that a God in a play that comes
from heaven or sky to the mean,
to the earth and wants to solve the problem?
So the title of the movie basically
says that it doesn't have various
means that there's no God here.
Everything is the machine,
or the crane or the machine, so.
Uh, the same is here.
So we are saying that you write
a process that gets the control
out of the kernel and wants to do
everything he wants the process
once so is it possible or no?
So this is the next question,
so let's put it in.
Uh,
the question for.
So.
You already answered this.
Yeah, so please go to the same
link so I put it again in the chat
box and answer this question.
I'll Dubya, I'll do. I mean,
keep this question. I'll do.
I'll explain this again, yeah.
So. In another word,
I mean the question is that
an application level program?
Uh, has the ability?
Or is it possible for
the that programmer men?
It becomes a process to
kill the kernel or shell or
whatever inside the memory?
So let's see answer.
OK, most of you say yes.
So these guys are gonna be a hacker.
Some of you say no,
this is a question in the lecture
assignment for the next week,
so you can search about that.
Those who write corners.
They are smart, so they may do something
that prevents you to do something like that.
Also, you as a programmer or smart
you may do something that they
couldn't prevent you to do so,
so it's a question.
It's an interesting question for the next
lecture assignment we can research about
that and then provide an answer to that.
I'm not going to give you answers
because the answer is both yes or no.
So as you can see here,
both are take, I mean correct.
So behavior is asked me.
I mean explain this one how the shell
gives the control to the process manager.
So as we said, I mean shell.
It's just a very simple program.
It has Princess two or three lines of code.
Basically it says that if.
A there is a command if
command prompt is not empty.
Meaning that there is something in
the command prompt followed by deep,
I mean enter so it then it because
Shell is part of the operating system,
although it's not part of the kernel,
but it is shipped by the operating system,
so the shell knows where is the kernel
varies the process manager inside the kernel.
So then here.
If there is some command and hit by the
inter, it could be address of the kernel.
Else. It's just a goal too.
If. Uh, to us, that's it.
It's a busy waiting.
If there's no comment,
you just go in a circle does nothing.
However,
when it sees a command here and followed by.
Enter or some character or by keystroke.
Then uh,
it goes to this part of the if.
And then call changes the IP in
order to make it jump to the
process manager part of the kernel.
It's a very simple,
simplified version of the shell,
but the I mean the structure is
following the same procedure.
Makes sense for ya.
OK.
Later you'll see that I'm in a shell,
is has a lot of, uh, I mean,
I mean capabilities,
but for now it's just that.
The main responsibility just
to put the starter program.
So. Now all we see that kernel sits
in the memory and waits for others to
call different parts of the kernel.
So we already saw one call from
the processor by the electrical
shock or electrical signal,
which we call IRQ from the hardware.
Also, now we can see that shell
also can call part of the kernel,
but shell is an application level program.
So basically it means that your
program as an application level
program when it becomes a process,
it is able to call different
parts of the kernel.
So then, in order to distinguish
between these two types of calls,
calls from the devices by our cue
from the processor and calls from
the application level programs,
they pick another name for the calls
by the application level programs.
So these type of call is called system call.
So system calls are all.
Those calls or those changes of
the IP register of the processor.
In order to call part of the
kernel which is triggered by
the application level programs,
for instance by the shell,
any called by the shell is called
a system called.
Also,
any call from your own process to the kernel.
For instance,
if you want to print hello in the monitor,
it's a system called because you are
asking the kernel to do that for you.
So again,
any call from the application level
program is called the system call.
Any call from the processor.
Because of the IRQ electrical signal,
it's called IRQ called or.
I mean electrical shock or signal.
So signal system call.
Or IRQ call IRQ handler call and system call.
Usually, as long as we as we said
we are in the application level.
So we are programming in application level.
So usually we do system call.
We are not trying to write device handlers
or RQ handlers because as we said,
we are not going to write
operating system or caramel.
So that's why we the main call is usually
I mean for our classes system calls.
But if you decide to do device drivers
or operating system during kernel at then
you most likely work with the IRQ calls.
So here is the difference
system called IRQ calls.
So one of them is from the hardware,
so the difference is that one
of them is from the hardware.
One of them is from application
level programs or process.
So any questions so far we have?
Nicholas asked when you refer
to the application level,
not layer application level.
Uh, are you talking in
relation to the OS I model?
Oh no, no no no no.
In the in the last week.
When we explain the birth of the
operating system, we said that we
have application level programs.
We have system level programs and
then we have the computer system.
We said that operating system and any
program that helps other programs
in order to provide service from the
complete system to the other programs,
we call them system level program and
then other programs that is just for
solving real world problems is called.
Uh, application level programs.
So it's not just part of the OS I model,
so it's not a network layered.
Ah.
The layered architecture we use
in the network systems no no.
Go ahead, victor.
Sir, could you go back to the
slide with the the diagram we've
been using with the circles?
Kind of so I just want to make
sure that I'm like understanding
this properly from the ground up.
So in this diagram when we say
computer we're talking specifically
about like the processor and the buses
and your your RAM memory, right?
Uh, in this diagram.
So if this let's go back to this target,
it's better this one.
This one is a better one because
that's a schematic doesn't show the
difference between program and process.
So let me clear this whole other thing.
Out. Anyways, so this is a better view,
so actually this is the
snapshot from your system.
Oh my God. OK, the part,
so I understand this shell acting at the
dispatcher between the Colonel and and
the process is the end shell address at.
Beside the processor is that that
anschell that that has to be in RAM?
Or are you saying that there's
like specifically a little cash
of memory inside the processor
that contains the shell address?
Oh oh, one thing.
I mean all when we when I say memory
I mean RAM yeah yeah it's 100%.
OK, so what's the question now?
So the end shell by the processor
that's like enclosed with that is
that just like 'cause that would be?
And would that be in RAM?
Or are you saying that there's a little
cache of memory inside the processor
itself specifically for the show?
No, it isn't the rap.
No shell is hosting the round.
Yeah and is it?
Is it a dumb?
Like a native,
like an inherent part of the kernel,
the shell that the shell is built
in as part of the kernel, no no,
no shell is not part of the kernel,
it's just a program.
But the the difference between
the shell and other program is
that it is launched by the kernel.
That's it.
That's the first program that
is launched by the kernel.
So funding from the kernel POV shell is
just another program which becomes a process.
That's it.
You can replace.
You've got all of the other programs
that are launched via the shell.
So again, these are all the other programs
are not launched inside the shell,
they are not by the shell but in
another space of their memory, yeah.
Yeah, and then.
So they're actually there.
Being the processes are being managed
by the kernel process manager,
but but the shell allows the user
to say which one has presidents.
Exactly,
so the only the only moment that
the shell is active is that uh,
at first everything is,
but so let's go back to the first slide here.
So at first when you have
the bootstrap external.
Right after Buddhist acting, they cannot.
The last few statements of the
kernel is launching the shell inside
any available space in the memory.
OK,
OK and then give the app access to the shell.
So now the shell has the processor and
in order to keep the processor within
itself it just does the busy waiting.
We already said how we can do the invisible,
just a four loop,
just go back to the first state.
However,
in the middle of the four loop,
it checks whether there is a
command in Shell or not,
and this is like this just
looking at the at this point,
just whether they disappear stroke
and that keystroke is an enter or not.
If there is something here followed
by acute stroke,
suddenly it goes to call
the process manager.
And then it loses it,
and then it loses the processor.
So when it calls your program,
for instance, the program is just
you put the name of your file,
your program, and then hit the enter.
So they shall ask the process manager.
So here you hit the enter.
The shell cause the process manager and
loses the control of the processor and
now the process manager has the processor.
OK, so so the process yeah?
Now the process manager I work
the only part that I still need
clarification on is the the irqs.
So whenever I actually hidden input,
is the process, like are the process
manager and the device manager synonymous?
Or are they completely different?
Like who is handling?
Oh, I see you.
You are saying that so, uh.
When you hit the enter,
you are also creating an IRQ
because of the keystroke.
Yeah yeah and then uh.
What happens that after
the handling the keystroke,
a process at the device manager has
the control how the process man?
I mean the device manager gives
the control to the process manager
to load the process.
You mean that yes, yes exactly yeah,
OK, so I'm not explaining that so.
Yeah, I mean,
I understand that you may feel
confused if I go to that detail.
It's become very complicated.
You're right.
So basically I assume that when
you write a command now,
the shell knows there's a file here.
So then it transferred to the
process manager.
But you're right, you hit the enter,
so when you hit the enter,
you generate the IRQ.
So the first part of the kernel gonna
be called is the device manager,
because it wants to handle.
What key was pressed?
If the key was entered an already,
there was some program inside the shell,
then it transferred the control
to the device manager.
It's very complicated,
but I I just wanted to simplify
that for the sake of us as
the application level program.
Uh we does I mean or this is enough for us.
If you want to go deeper, you can go to.
For instance you can you have to
be a system level programming.
And know how to drive a car now, yeah?
Concern, just consider it the
gel passes control to the process
manager when another pro like an
application level program is activated.
Exactly, yeah, yeah,
that's that's as long. I mean,
as long as we concerned that's enough for us.
Yeah, OK, alright.
Thank you so.
Yeah, I didn't put the IRQ for this enter.
So, but if you think about that,
you can follow. I mean you can think
of a process how to give the control.
I mean to the device manager first and then
transfer it to the process manager and etc.
I just make it a simple.
Simple. Anyways, OK so.
Now we know how to put this travel program
by the means of shell inside the memory.
So there is another part of
any operating system. Option.
But usually most of the
operating system has this part.
It's called library routines.
What the purpose?
The purpose is that when you write a program,
you definitely see some moments
that you have to repeat some codes.
For instance, if you want to do
some mathematical formulation,
for instance, calculating the square
root of a Satnam some number.
So you feel like that you already had
the same lines of code for another.
Program, so either you copy paste those
lines of code in your own program,
or you can just simply make
it library out of those.
I mean common code lines,
and then whenever you need them in
your program you just simply use them.
So as an instance, for instance, I'm not.
I don't know how to change that.
For instance,
one of the most common tasks in your
C programs are printing printing to
the standard output monitor or asking
for some input from the keyboard.
So these are very common.
I mean,
C code lines that you put in any programs,
or for instance, doing some math,
for instance, is square root of a number.
So either you have to repeat the same
line of code in all of your programs,
or you can just put them in some
packages and whenever you need them,
you just simply reuse them.
So those that actually write the
operating system they already knew
what are the common code lines,
so they already provided these
libraries as an option for you.
So these library or C programs
that are already does some common
things as an advantage for your
program is called library routines,
and they are delivered as the option
next to the kernel and the shell.
So then you are able to use already
made programs in your program.
For instance,
you are not going to do write C
program lines to do this group
because it's already available in
the math library or for instance.
Uh,
you are not going to write lines of
code to print out simple characters
and monitor because it's already
done in this function in this
library of I mean library routine
delivered by the operating system so.
Again, there are some comments,
C programs that it is estimated that all
the other program is going to use them,
so it's already a program
and become efficient,
and it's already compared to
OP codes available as a library
routines and you can use them.
So I mean in this figure
I mean it schematically.
They showed like this so.
The operating system must have a kernel,
must have a shell,
but optionally they can give you some.
I mean already made C programs to help you.
I mean do some tasks for instance to
math task or Frances if you need to know
what is the current time of the system,
either you have to write C lines yourself,
or it's already done.
You can simply reuse these lines of code.
In your program,
and then do for instance know the time
of the current time of your system.
So these are called library routines.
There are some important thing
about the library routines.
First and foremost is that the library
routines delivered by the operating
system they are not in memory.
The initial part of the operating
system is the kernel.
Good stuff by the bias.
After the kernel, we have the shell
inside the memory or inside the ramp,
then the memory waits for other programs to
ask the shell to bootstrap inside the memory.
The library routines are not in memory,
there are just in some hard disk drive or
USB next to the I mean the operating system.
So there are basically like
your program in a file.
But they are not written by you,
they are written by other programmers.
I mean professional programmers.
And delivered by the operating system.
So. The next thing is.
These programs already compiled in opcodes.
So you may say that let's open the C
file for doing the square roots delivered
by units and see what's going on.
You can see the source code,
but when you install or when you
want to use the operating system,
all of these are programs that
are already compiled into opcodes,
so they are all in opcodes.
When you buy the operating system.
So again, if when you
buy an operating system,
the kernel might be have the source code,
but when you want to run it all
in opcode compared to OP code,
mandatory part of the operating system
shell is the same may be written
in other programming languages,
but finally they should be in
opcode because it's a program,
so it is also many part
of the operating system.
The library routine part of the
operating system is an optional part.
It's a kind of additional
help to the programmers,
but there are also already
compiled up code of your system.
But the next question is that how
can we use the library routines?
How can for instance be used?
The square root function of the math library?
Or how can we know the current
time of the system by calling
the library routine for time?
Or how can we print out characters
into the monitor by using the
functions in the system library?
So. There are two ways.
The first one is the easiest one that you
are used to this most of your programs.
When you want to use,
I mean printing out some characters.
You use this type of uh I mean linking to
the already library to the library teams.
So it is called a static link.
How it happens?
Basically, when you write your
program at the time of compile time.
After compilation,
you use another program called Linker.
To add the opcodes of that
library into your opcodes.
So basically you already include,
so in your program when you say that,
include.
STD IO dot H and you write your program.
When you compile your program,
the opcode of your program
doesn't have the opcode of STIO.
At the time of linking,
it includes the opcode of the STI.
So here is the sketch.
So you write your program.
However,
for some tasks you just simply
reuse the already made function.
But when you compile your program,
the assembly lines of your program
and also when you after the
assembler opcode of your program
doesn't have the opcode of the
printf function or this DIO library.
They are all in another places,
but they are all in up.
When you use the linker.
The linker knows that in part of these
opcodes there is a call to this library.
It tries to find the opcode of this
library and then merge it or added
in your program so the final file
which is executable in your system,
has the opcode of the library that you used,
and the op code of your own program.
The more library you use,
the larger your program becomes Princess.
If you include 10 libraries.
So your program includes the opcode of
all the other 10 libraries into your program.
So your your final program becomes
larger because it includes the
upload of all the libraries that
you include in your program,
and you use them.
This is called the static linking
and.
How we run a program that does the
static linking to the library routines.
Very similar because from the kernel
point of view and from the Shell POV
nothing changed because they see the
whole thing as the collection of opcodes.
They don't want to know these opcodes
came from where they just see.
These are the opcodes and the only task
is just loading them to the memory,
so everything is the same as previous.
So even if your program uses a
library routine, it's already the
opcode is merged your program,
so you make a request to the shell.
Shell is doing the busy waiting.
Suddenly sees there is a
request from a program.
It sends the request to the Colonel
and the Colonel loads your process.
With additional opcodes in the beginning,
additional opcodes in the end and
inside your process you have the
opcode of the library that you used,
and this is already added by the linker,
not by the kernel, not by the shell.
Pass by the linker at the compile time.
This is one way.
So then you can request kernel again and etc.
Everything is the same as the normal process.
Because channel doesn't care whether
you are using a library team or these
are the output of your own program.
From the point of view of the kernel,
everything or the opcodes.
So everything is the same. However,
this is another way to call the kernel,
which is called dynamic link.
So a dynamic link is happening
during the runtime of your program,
meaning that when your program is a process,
so the dynamic link happens
at the time of process.
Using the kernel. So you call.
The library routine to use it at the runtime.
So how this happens?
Your program.
Is just the opcode of your program
without the opcode of the library
routines that you want to use.
So you requested the shell and the shell
requested the kernel to load your pros.
Your program as a process.
So everything seems that there is
no call to any library routines,
so the control goes to your process
and at some point you have the C.
A command print F something.
And the printf is in the STD IO library.
So at this point you need to include the
library routine from the system package.
So what happens is that before that your
process make a request to the kernel.
Any request from application level
program is called the system call.
So in another word,
your process maker system call
to the kernel and ask the kernel
to load the library for you.
The kernel loads the requested
library inside the memory,
but not as a part of your process,
but as a single Singleton process inside
a memory in any available memory spot.
And then after loading that part of
library it gives the control to the
process and now process knows by
giving the control to the process.
Also it gives the address of this
library package that is loaded
inside the memory.
Now the process has the control
also knows where is the library.
So then the process make a call to
the library to use the function.
Inside that library.
After it's done.
It brings back to the process.
So one thing is that.
Here we see the process
called another program.
This is not a system call because system
call is a request from the kernel.
This is a call to another process,
so process to another process
is not a system called.
So it's just a normal call.
We call it dynamic linking or dynamic call.
And then when it's done,
it brings back to control to this system,
and then everything goes to the to
the end up code of the process.
One thing happens is that
because you don't need the,
that library that sits library
anymore than the kernel removed that
cyst from the memory to make more
memory available to other programs.
So in the dynamic link it happens at
the runtime at the moment that the
processor needs the function of the library.
At that point,
your process make a system called
the kernel and ask the kernel to
load that part of the library.
They cannot load that part of the
library for you and then transfer
the control to your process.
Then your process knows the ways
that library calls that library.
Use that,
and then brings back the control to itself.
And that's it.
That's called a dynamic linking.
So which one is better,
dynamic linking or static linking?
So far in all of your programs
you did static linking.
In this course you are going
to learn how to do a dynamic
linking and what's the benefit.
That's another advantage of this course.
You become an advanced programmer.
Now you have the option to
do a statical or dynamical.
So it is based on the speed and memory.
So which one is faster?
So this is my question, so let me put.
The question here again.
Go to the next question.
Please go to the same link.
And, uh, answer this question.
If a program does static linking faster,
or if it does dynamic linking.
You may say that sometimes
you do it statically,
linking for some libraries by doing
dynamic looking for another libraries.
You have the option.
At any point you can do is
static or dynamic linking.
As a programmer,
we are able to make a decision.
So this is the first question.
Which one is faster?
We have 44 votes but you have no idea.
Student wake up guys. You have a question.
So it seems 50% of our students are.
Not paying attention or, uh?
The question is a little bit hard.
So let's see the answer.
So. Uh, we can say majority up the
correct answer, but again we have a
lot of students have an equal dancer.
So let's see what's there a really I mean.
Let's go to the next question and
then we can explain what's the.
A reason for the mean for the correct answer.
So now which program needs less memory?
Static needs more compile time,
but not sure one time.
I don't know if it's human.
So let's see the answer.
OK, most of you, I think,
but it still is. I mean, uh.
Uh, we have some students that
are the incorrect answers,
so let me let me explain.
So I'm not going to give you the.
Exact answer because it's a part of
the lecture assignment for next week,
so you have the time to think more about
that, but in order to explain these,
I'm going to explain like as a.
I mean real-world situation.
Imagine you want to go for a trip.
So you are this person.
And you want to go for a trip
so you have a backpack.
Princess, this is your backpack.
So one thing is that.
If you need everything in your trip,
you go and buy it and then you put
all this stuff in your backpack.
So as a result,
your backpack gonna be a huge backpack.
What's the advantage?
The advantage is that at any point in
your trip, whenever you need something,
you can quickly have that.
So there is no I mean I mean no
delay to find, for instance,
something from your backpack,
because everything is with you.
So when you do static linking,
you are acting like this.
You bring everything you
need in your own process.
So whenever you need it,
you can simply use it.
But what is the disadvantage?
You have to carry a huge backpack.
You are wasting a lot of space of memory.
Even if you just one or two times
need some part of the library.
So the this is the way that
you do is static linking.
However, imagine you have a very small pack.
For instance, you are a biker, so you cannot.
I mean have a very big I mean backpack,
so you have a very small backpack.
You just put essential things in your
backpack, but what's the advantage?
Advantages that you can run faster,
you can go further.
Whenever you need something that
you don't have in your backpack,
you just simply have your own phone so
you can make a call and you can ask,
for instance the delivery guy
to bring that thing for you.
So whenever you need something
that is not in your backpack,
you make it phone call.
To bring that for you,
or you go to a store and buy it.
OK, So what is the advantage?
The advantage is that
you are smaller you are.
I mean you can go faster,
you waste less amount of memory.
But what is the disadvantage?
Disadvantage is that whenever you need
something that you don't have with you,
you have to make a call.
So you have to wait for the
delivery guy to bring it to you so.
By this analogy,
I think you have the answer.
So we have about 5 minutes.
I'm going to just quickly
go through the history.
Why we didn't go through the history
of Unix before? Because we need
you to know some terminologies.
For instance, what is OS operating system?
What is kernel?
What is bias for this MBR?
While this processor was
library routines etc.
We need you to know these words before
explaining the history behind the Unix.
Because those guys that provide
the operating system for the units
they were advanced programmers.
So there were a lot of things
happened in the history.
So in order to explain those
things you need to know these
topics before then you know the
history and you can understand
what's happening in the history
or in the evolution of the Unix.
So at first there were nothing.
Basically there were just machines
and you have to put your opcode in
binary sequence in a paper and then you
have to manually put it into the machine.
So there were nothing such as
operating system to help you.
Then at the time,
during the 1969 nineteen 70s.
The units actually born.
And gradually after the first Unix.
Everyone tried to follow the
same idea and have their own
operating system up until now.
But as you can see here,
from all these different operating
systems currently available in the market,
and you can go and buy,
or you can have it for free on your system.
As you can see,
all of them are rooted into the Unix.
The only operating system which is
not rooted in the Unix is this one,
and I'm going to expand it a little bit.
So this operating system is the only
operating system which is not based on Unix.
But all the other operating
systems are based on Unix.
So what was the purpose of the unit?
What is the beginning of the Unix?
At first there were there was this huge
mainframe from the General Electric Company.
Within his company,
I'm sure that all of you know this company,
so they had this mainframe.
As you can see, it takes about a.
I mean this place very close
to the basketball court.
It's a huge machine.
These are the repositories and these
are the processing unit and etc.
So there were only one programmer
or two that can use this machine,
so they said that this huge
investment is just wasting time or
ETC for just one programmer or two.
It's not a efficient way
of using this mainframe.
So they started the program in order to
enable multiple access to this huge machine.
This project started by the General Electric.
They hired some researchers from the
MIT and also from the Bell Labs.
And the task was that writing a
program in order to help multiple
access to this machine.
That was the birth of the.
Free operating system called multiplexed
Information and Computing Service or MULTICS.
Why this operating system didn't?
I mean why this operation didn't
become the first operating
system because it was a failure?
This operating system was
written in assembly language.
It was very big.
Nobody could debug this operating
system and at at at the end they
figured that this is not a good
operating system and it was a failure.
So the researchers from the Bell
Labs and MIT quit the project.
And they came back to their home.
However.
Two of these researchers from the Bell Labs.
I mean Dennis Ritchie and the Thompson.
When they came back to their own lab,
they had mini computers.
This set that let's write an operating
system very similar to the MULTICS,
but not just for multiple users,
just for one user.
But it's still very simple
and small operating system.
So in this mini computer PDP seven,
they started the first operating system,
very small copy from the Multics.
So you can see this is the Thompson.
This is Dennis Ritchie,
so they said that it's a multi access
multi user access to the computer.
Just having successful unite
flexed operating system.
So they provided this uniflex
information and computing service.
Unix at first they called you Knox,
but gradually it becomes Unix.
So basically, Unix was an operating system.
Kind of, I mean initiated by the Multics.
But because of the failure of the Multics,
they say that let's do
it simple for one user.
Access this system and the Unix was in
assembly or with an editor to write
programs in assembly and also with the shell.
You see that even the various.
Operating system came with the ship.
Because without the shell, nobody can
take advantage of the operating system.
So that was the first operating system.
By assemble language for just this machine.
This operating system could
only serve in this machine.
Then, uh, they said that the. As we said,
the Unix becomes larger and larger,
so they couldn't handle the units to debug
and maintain the units by the assembly.
So they provided the C programming
language in 1960s seventy three,
and then they rewrite the Unix in C program.
But there's still.
This operating system
was only for this system.
And this is the first version
of the Unix in C program.
It just has the assembler compiler
for C and shell and a text editor.
And now. I'm going to just explain
one or two slides and I'll leave
it for the next week then.
Uh, because this operating system
on this machine was successful.
Are there programmers they had
different computer systems?
This said that let's try write operating
system for our own computer system.
But it's starting a new
operating system was a challenge,
so this said that let's reuse
the Unix but for definitions.
However, there were problems.
A Bell Labs was a company based
on the communication for the
communication and this stuff,
so they were not a computer
company so they couldn't.
Make the Unix as a product and sell it.
So basically,
if for instance at the time you
have a machine X and you need
an operating system for this,
either you have to write your
own operating system.
Or you have to quietly ask.
Dennis Ritchie and Cash Thompson.
To borrow you the source code
of the Unix on their machine.
Then you have the source code
of the Unix and then you can
change it for your ownership.
That was the exact thing happened in
the history, basically illegally.
Kenneth Thompson uh release the source
code of the Unix in C language,
and this is the famous signature
of him love can, which was illegal,
but just for the benefit of other
programmers on their machine.
He relieves the unique source
code and that was the.
Moments that the Unix became a kind of
World War world wide operating system.
Before that moment it was just.
At this machine for just a use,
use users by these programmers only.
So next AT&T, which was the
next name for the Bell Labs,
it changes the area of I mean
business from the communication
goes to the computer stuff.
So then they could make
the unit as a product.
They gave free licenses to the
universities and commercial
licenses for others to buy. And.
These are the I'm going to
explain these slides later,
but that was the moment that the
Unix become the idea or the first
operating system on other systems.
And, uh, basically all the
Unix users they created.
This scattering, called unit used next,
which is Unix users.
In order to promote the
Unix for other systems.
Also to solve the bugs off the Unix and etc.
And this is a very beautiful picture.
We can finish our lecture by
this picture because in this
picture you can see that all of
them are laughing or smiling.
The only person who is not
smiling or laughing is who.
Anybody can find the
person that is not smiling.
Yes, I mean this person who is.
Dennis, Richard. Actually,
basically this is a picture in the
Wikipedia you can find the picture.
There is a history behind
this picture and basically
they said that we were there,
all of them for the product or
the final program of this person
also can stop some please.
Yes, that was the today's lecture.
So we are going to continue the
history next week and then from the
next week we gradually go deep into
the C programming and using the.
A features of the operating
system for our C programs.
Yeah. I mean these, I mean,
did the first two weeks is just
an introduction for you to become
familiar with the some concepts
and some words and now on we can
go with advanced C programming.
OK, but one one thing is that I mean,
uh, I mean, see.
Just a for the sometimes illegal acts,
but for the sake of I mean goodness.
Has a huge advantage,
so you see just one by this person who just.
Simply release his own code to
be used by others illegally.
He could change the.
World of computer systems. Yeah.
OK, I'm ready for your question.
Somebody raised their hands so I fall I.
So you can ask a question right Professor,
so I just have sort of a.
A general question, UM,
in sort of modern Unix systems.
So like my Mac for example.
Do you have multiple instances
of the shell going at once?
Or is it just one shell always?
Oh, uh, we we can have multiple shells.
We can have multiple operating systems?
Uh, yes it is able to have multiple shells.
And also yeah, the answer is yes.
The mother operating system
have multiple shells.
Yeah so if I have.
I mean not if I have it's in today's
world it's it's all the time.
I always have multiple
programs running at once.
Those programs are all
running in one shell usually.
Oh, one thing again.
Do not let me back to this slide.
Shell doesn't run your program shell.
Just load your program.
So a way to say, let me explain.
OK, let me back to here.
Let me find a free space over here.
This is a good example so.
Uh, you're saying that?
I mean, what explains so far?
It was that. I mean we have done
one process inside the memory.
We have kernel as a process.
We have the shell as a process.
We have this as a process,
but this is the only process that
is application level program.
Yeah, you are saying that.
But in modern operating system we
are running multiple applications or
multiple processes in the same time.
This is a.
I mean this is possible, but it's still.
You may have only one shell.
But The thing is that how when the
process your process has the control.
How sometimes the control goes
to the shell and the shell.
See whether there is a program or no.
If there is another program
requesting to become a process,
then the shell loads that this is
the main question. So how the shell?
Load another program when it
doesn't have the control.
That's the main question.
The thing is that in order to
explain this I have to explain
process scheduling in later weeks,
but let me explain it here. OK here.
So we have only one processor.
This processor can be allocated to
the processes or programs by time.
So the idea is this.
We say that we load the
kernel inside the memory.
Then we have one single of the shell. OK.
So we say that if the shell has the control,
it does busy waiting for
waiting for another process.
Suddenly it sees a request from a process.
It loads the process.
Process process one.
And it gives the control to the process.
But just for two seconds.
After running two seconds of
the opcodes from the processor,
one inside the processor,
it gives the processor from the process
one and brings it back to the shell.
And then again shall have two seconds to
check whether there is another program,
or if within that two second,
there's another process.
It loads that process in
such another available space.
It cause process two and then it gives
this process and other two seconds.
So then, as you can see here,
it goes.
The processor goes in inside a huge
loop and it gives only two seconds to
each process, two second to the shell,
two second to process,
12 second to process 2.
And then if there's another
process again this way.
So also the kernel.
One thing the camera is also in the loop,
so the kernel has two seconds and
then the shell has two seconds etc.
So you see here,
behind the processor there is a queue
of the processes kernel shell process,
one process to an, etc.
Each one has only two seconds to
run the opcode of their program.
Of course, the kernel has higher priority.
For instance,
you may give four second kernel
2 seconds to this shell,
but one second to other processes.
All these way of sharing a single
processor to different processes inside
the memory is a task of process manager.
And it's called the scheduling and will
discuss in deep in the next few weeks.
Yeah,
it's a good question and so far we
assume that there's only one process
and at any time memory and other
processor just catch a yeah and
let's say again, I'm just I just I.
I just want to understand,
sort of what my computer is doing.
That's sort of where my curiosity
is right now.
Obviously my computer is Mac,
so it's got, you know, multiple cores.
Uhm?
In the processor does this.
How much does this process change when
you have a processor with multiple cores?
Uh, the principle is the same
because at the end of the day,
the opcode of your program should go
inside the memory and at some time the
processor or one or two core of the
processor is assigned to your program.
Which basically means that that code
fetches the opcode of your program and
brings it inside the core and execute that.
The whole is the same,
so this cycle they fetch, increment,
execute is the same for the opcodes
your program is still in the OP code,
but the only difference is that now you
have multiple processors to run multiple
processes in parallel. But again,
all the process must be in in memory, all or.
Bootstrap by the shell.
For instance in the match when you
just double click on a program that
graphical user interface is a shell,
it's not like let me go back.
This type of shell is called come
up from chair. Bye. Here yeah.
This is a shell, but it's a black shell.
It's called command prompt shell.
But, uh.
This is this one, I mean my.
Let me show you my the windows, I mean the.
Oh the desktop. Swap.
Scott this is also a shell.
This this is a shell for the Microsoft.
So, but this is a graphical based shell,
so whenever you double click or for instance,
I click on this.
This click is just a request to
shell to open this program for me.
So the principle is the same,
but a little bit in detail or more complex,
but the whole structure is the same, yeah?
OK,
thank you.
You're welcome.
So I'm going to be in the office,
so if you have any other question
you can answer, question there, uh?
So they have your can you
go to the office? OK, yeah,
I just had some quick question one OK,
but that's fine. OK, thank you.
You too honey have a great day.
So because I have to close.
This class and then go to the office.
So any questions you're welcome.
Owners have a great day.
Bye. A great day so.
Thank you if I had no worries.
Uh, OS. Uh, as I said, uh.
Operating system. The core part
of the operating systems kernel.
So an operating system also has a shell,
so you can say that kernel plus
shell is an operating system. Yeah.
Operating system can optionally
have library routines, but it's an
option so you can have an operating
system without library teams.
Any other questions?
So. I'm going to.
Very movie I mean.
If tasam Joshua Justin.
Khushi, Mohab and Radoslav.
Uh, if you don't mind I'm
going to remove you from the
class and then close this one.
You're welcome. Have a great day.
Schwab.
Stop the leak.